---
layout: project
category: projects
title: Report Assembler
tags: ['Javascript|the JavaScript / ECMAScript programming language']
timeperiod: late 2012
projecturl: https://github.com/DanielBaird/Report-Assembler
sourceurl: https://github.com/DanielBaird/Report-Assembler
summary: "This little JavaScript library takes JSON data and a carefully written source document, and merges them into a finished report.  I started this so I could get CliMAS Reports finished as quickly as possible."
---
This is little JavaScript library that takes JSON data and a carefully written source document, and merges them into a result document.  It's aimed at making prose descriptions of scientific data.  I started this so I could get CliMAS Reports finished as quickly as possible.

Report Assembler replaces @$$variable@ in your document with a value, and will work out @[[ logical == conditions ]]@ to determine which parts of the document should be included.  For example, with this JSON:

{% highlight javascript %}
{
    "ZombieSpeedMPH": 4.5
    "IncubationDays": 2
}
{% endhighlight %}

You can write a report template like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
Your local zombie variety moves at $$ZombieSpeedMPH
mph.  If you get bitten, you will turn into a zombie
after $$IncubationDays [[IncubationDays != 1]]days.
[[IncubationDays == 1]]day.
{% endhighlight %}

..and Report Assembler can give you a nice report on zombies:

bq. Your local zombie variety moves at 4.5 mph.  If you get bitten, you will turn into a zombie after 2 days.

The library isn't particularly powerful, but it served its purpose of letting the scientist working with me on "CliMAS Reports":{% post_url projects/2012-12-18-climas %} write a kind of super-document with many complicated conditional parts, without them having to be a programmer themselves.

Find out more from the "source code":{{ page.sourceurl }}, in particular "the readme":https://github.com/DanielBaird/Report-Assembler/blob/master/README.md includes a little documentation.
`