---
layout: post
category: article
tags: cards game frustration 'phase 10' frustratzee yahtzee
---
Here's a card game my Friday Night Cards group came up with, back when we actually played cards instead of just sitting around chatting.

It's based on a game I know as "Frustration".  For years I haven't been able to find rules for Frustration online, but recently I've discovered that it's a slightly modified version of "Phase 10":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phase_10.

I'll describe Frustration first, then the rules for the game we invented, Frustratzee. So you get rules for two games in this one (looong) post.  Lucky you.

h2. Rules of Frustration

In Frustration, players race to complete, in order, every pattern in a list of card patterns.

h3. Patterns

Frustration challenges the players to form particular patterns of cards.  There is a fixed list of 10 patterns, and each pattern is a combination of melds -- runs and sets.  A **run** is some cards in numerical order, e.g.
<span class="cards"><span class="heart">8</span><span class="heart">9</span><span class="club">10</span><span class="diamond">J</span></span>.
A **set** is some cards with the same face value, e.g.
<span class="cards"><span class="club">5</span><span class="spade">5</span><span class="heart">5</span></span>.

Here's the list of patterns:

1. A run of 7 cards
2. Two sets of 3 cards
3. A run of 4 cards, and a set of 3 cards
4. A run of 4 cards, and a set of 4 cards
5. A run of 8 cards
6. A set of 5 cards, and a set of 2 cards
7. Two sets of 4 cards
8. A run of 9 cards
9. A set of 5 cards, and a run of 6 cards
10. A set of 5 cards, and another set of 4 cards

Note that the lengths specified are the minimum; it's okay to make longer sets or runs -- if you want two sets of 3, you can play a set of 4 and a set of 5.

h3. Starting the game

Shuffle together **two decks** of cards.  Don't include the jokers.  **Twos are wild** and can be used in place of any other card.  With twos as wild cards, straights can go down to 3 at the low end, and up to Ace at the high end.  **Suits never matter** in Frustration.

Choose a player to act as dealer, who deals out **ten cards** to each player.  The remaining deck goes in the middle of the table, face down, and the top card is turned over and put next to the deck.  This is the start of the discard pile that all players will share.

Players can look at their cards immediately, and might want to order their hands from lowest (3s) to highest (Aces), then wild cards (2s).

The player to the dealer's left starts.  In the first hand, every player is trying to complete pattern 1.

h3. Taking your turn

Every player's turn starts with picking up a card; the player chooses to take the top card from the discard pile (which is sitting face up), or the top card from the rest of the deck (which is face down and therefore a mystery).

So the first player picks up and adds the card to their hand.  With those eleven cards, perhaps they can make the pattern they're going for.  If so, they may put down the sets and runs of that pattern onto the table, face up.  They can't put down one part of the pattern, they need the whole thing before they can put down anything.
Whether or not the player can put down their pattern, to end their turn they choose a card to discard, face up, onto the discard pile, and it's the next player's turn.

<aside>
    Strategy tip: watch what the next player picks up, and consider the pattern they are trying to get.  Can you discard something they won't be able to use?
</aside>

Once a player has put their pattern down, they can also add cards to any melds on the table -- their own or other players'.  You can do this in the same turn you put your pattern down, or on any turn after that (until the end of the current hand).  The added cards must continue the set or run correctly: for example you can add a <span class="card spade">5</span> to a set of <span class="cards"><span class="heart">5</span><span class="spade">5</span><span class="club">5</span></span>, or add a <span class="card diamond">K</span> to the end of a <span class="cards"><span class="heart">9</span><span class="diamond">10</span><span class="diamond">J</span><span class="club">Q</span></span> run.

Don't forget though, **you can only put out cards if you have put down your own pattern first.**

Also remember that twos are wild.  A player can use a two in place of any other card, and there are no restrictions on the number of twos in a meld.  Once placed into a meld, a two cannot be collected or swapped out.  Twos can only act as other real cards, a two can't be used to over-extend a run below three or above Ace.

Once a player has put down the pattern they were chasing, their next goal is to get rid of the cards remaining in their hand by adding to melds on the table.  (A player can't try to get the next pattern until the next hand starts.)  On their turn they continue to pick up a new card on their turn, put cards out if possible, then discard at the end of their turn. The hand ends when someone has put out or discarded their last card, leaving their hand empty.

A player isn't required to discard if their turn uses all their cards in other ways, and therefore ends the hand.  Sometimes a player is able to use all eleven cards when putting down their pattern, which ends the hand immediately.

h3. Scoring the end of a hand

A hand ends when one player has no cards left.  Every other player will have cards left in their hands.  These cards are worth penalty points.  Score **5 points** for each number card <span class="generic card">3</span> up to <span class="generic card">10</span>, **10 points** for each picture card <span class="generic cards"><span>J</span><span>Q</span><span>K</span></span>, and **20 points** for each <span class="generic card">A</span> and <span class="generic card">2</span>.  Players that managed to get their pattern will score few penalty points.

h3. Subsequent hands

The dealer position rotates to the next player along, and this dealer re-shuffles the two decks, deals all players a fresh hand of ten cards, and play starts again.  Players who got to put down pattern 1 in the first hand (all players who made the pattern, not just the player who ended the hand) now try to get pattern 2.  Players who didn't put down pattern 1 attempt pattern 1 a second time.  Play continues until a player ends the hand by putting down a pattern, then all their remaining cards.

Hands continue in this way.  Each player must repeatedly attempt to put down a pattern until they get that pattern, and then attempt the next, in order, through the list of ten patterns.  When you get stuck on a particular pattern for several hands you understand the game's name very clearly.

h3. Ending the game

Eventually someone gets each pattern up to pattern 10.  You can only get one pattern each hand, so the game will go at least 10 hands, but usually goes 15 or so.  When a hand ends in which a player successfully completed pattern 10, the game finishes.  Penalty points are totalled for that hand and all previous hands, and the winner is the player with the least penalty points (often, but not always, the game ender).  Penalty points can also determine second place, third place, and so on.




